# 0.9 (Burghmuirhead)

Version 0.9 (Burghmuirhead) presents multiple major new features, bugfixes, as
well as significant changes and improvements to the Links internals.

## Major Changes

### Model-View-Update

Links now includes a Model-View-Update library for writing client code, as
pioneered by the Elm programming langauge. More can be found on
[the Wiki page](https://github.com/links-lang/links/wiki/Model-View-Update-(Elm-Architecture)).

### Relational Lenses: Dynamic Predicates and Typechecking

The implementation of relational lenses has been extended to support _dynamic_
predicates in `select` queries. Additionally, much work has been done in order
to allow better typechecking of relational lenses.

### Mutual Blocks

Mutually-recursive functions and types should now be enclosed in a `mutual`
block:

```
mutual {
  typename Even = [| Z | SuccE:Odd |];
  typename Odd = [| SuccO:Even |];

  sig three : () -> Odd
  fun three() {
    SuccO(SuccE(SuccO(Z)))
  }
}
```

This leads to significant improvements with the performance of the typechecker
when considering mutually-recursive types, simplifies the code, and solves
multiple bugs.

### FreezeML

FreezeML is a new approach to integrating first-class, System F-style
polymorphism with ML-style type inference. The system relies on not guessing
polymorphism, and the ability to "freeze" variables in order to suppress
instantiation. See the [TyDe abstract](http://tydeworkshop.org/2019-abstracts/paper19.pdf) for more details.

Version 0.9 includes an implementation of FreezeML:

  - Frozen variables (i.e., variables which are not instantiated) are written
    `~e`
  - Frozen lets (i.e., function definitions which never generalise their types)
    are written `~fun f(x) { x }`
  - Explicit function generalisation is written `$(fun(x) { x }` and produces a
    term of type `forall a::Any,b::Row. (a) -b-> a`
  - Explicit instantiation is written using `@`

The previous work on "explicit quantification" has been removed.

### Effect Sugar

If the `effect_sugar` flag is set, there are many improvements which decrease
the number of times where explicit effect variables are required.

  - Fresh effect variables are no longer generated by the parser
  - Higher-order functions share an effect variable with their calling context: for example,
    `map : ((a) -e-> b, [a]) -e-> [b]` can be written as `map : ((a) -> b, [a]) -> [b]`.
  - Type names can now be written with an implicit effect variable, for example
    `typename Comp(a) = () ~> a` can be written insetad of `Comp(a, e::Eff) = () ~e~> a, and
    `forever : Comp(()) ~> ()` can be written instead of `forever : Comp((), e) ~e~> ()`
  - Presence variables can be omitted from effects. As an example, we can
    write
      ```
      sig evalState : (s) ->
                    (Comp(a, {Get:s,Put:(s) {}-> () |_})) ->
                     Comp(a, {                      |_})
      ```
      instead of
      ```
      sig evalState : (s) ->
                    (Comp(a, {Get:s,Put:(s) {}-> () |_})) ->
                     Comp(a, {Get{_},Put{_}         |_})
      ```

### Non-user-visible changes

Much work on 0.9 has concentrated on significant non-user-visible changes. In
particular:

  - Desugaring passes which occur after the typechecker are now type-preserving
  - Changes to internal representation of types
  - Many internal refactorings

## Minor Changes

### Module system changes

 - Modules now work better on the REPL

 - `import` is now used to allow a module to be used in the current file,
   whereas `open` brings it into the global scope. To get the previous
   behaviour, use `open import X` for a module `X`. (breaking change)

 - Many behind-the-scenes improvements and bugfixes

### Other minor changes

 - Compilation on OCaml 4.08 now supported
 - `select` queries now printed when debugging enabled
 - Query shredding now supported in SQLite
 - The `End` session type is now linear, and must be eliminated using `close`.
   This solves a class of memory leaks with session-typed applications.
 - Record field punning is now supported. For example, instead of writing
   `var hello = "hi"; (hello = hello, world="universe")`, it is now possible to
   write `var hello = "hi"; (=hello, world="universe")`.
 - `lines`, `unlines`, `partition`, and `span` added to prelude
 - Hyphenated HTML attributes are now allowed
 - "Primed" variables such as `x'` are now allowed
 - Initial (hacky) support for null integers in the database. If
   the `coerce_null_integers` setting is set to `true`, then `null_integer`
   (default -1) will be used instead of crashing at runtime.
 - Fix draggable list (sessions), draggable cropping frame examples

# 0.8 (Merchiston)

## Relational Lenses

Links 0.8 introduces support for Incremental Relational Lenses. See [the
paper](https://arxiv.org/pdf/1807.01948.pdf) for details.


## Minor Changes

  1. Session exception handling is now more liberal, allowing variables
     to be shared between the success and failure blocks.

  2. Migrate to the Dune build system.

## Bugfixes

  1. Fix non-typechecking examples.
  2. Fix type signatures for `domSetAttributeFromRef`,
     `domSetPropertyFromRef`, and `domSetStyleAttrFromRef`.
  3. Fix buggy implementation of `getValue` in `jslib`.
  4. Fix `domGetChildrenFromRef` to return only DOM elements
     instead of whitespaces

# 0.7.3

This minor release contains various bug fixes and improves the dynamic
loading facility for database drivers that was introduced in the
previous release.

## Lazy Loading of Present Database Drivers

The loading of present database drivers is now deferred until an
actual attempt to connect to a database is made.

# 0.7.2

Version 0.7.2 contains mainly behind-the-scenes improvements, however they may
have a large impact on performance.

## Package Structure and JBuilder

Links now uses JBuilder as its build system. In particular, this means that
there are now multiple Links packages:

  - `links` contains the executable
  - `links-core` exposes the Links source as a library
  - (optional) `links-postgresql` is a dynamic loadable database driver for PostgreSQL.

Additionally, `links-mysql` and `links-sqlite` are dynamically-loadable database
drivers for MySQL and SQLite3 respectively, but while present in the source, are
not formally released or officially supported.

## Exception Handling with Session Types

A recent [draft paper](http://simonjf.com/drafts/chomp-draft-nov17.pdf)
describes an exception handling mechanism which works in the presence of session
types. This is included in 0.7.2.
You can find out more on the [wiki](https://github.com/links-lang/links/wiki/Exceptions-and-Session-Types).

## Performance Improvements

  - The JavaScript runtime library is now tail-call-optimised.

  - Links now uses linked lists on the client-side, as opposed to JS arrays. As
    a rough idea of the performance increase: "The running time for calling map
    on a 100,000 element list went from browser-angrily-kills-page-after-30-seconds
    to taking around 1 second."

## Bugfixes
  - Issue 293: REPL responses now go to stdout and not stderr.
  - Issue 149: inner functions may now have type annotations.
  - Issue 280: polymorphic FFI annotations are now correctly universally quantified.

# 0.7.1

Fixes some issues with configuration files, and allows better navigation on the examples pages.

# 0.7 (Dalry)

Version 0.7 of Links brings many new features (some of which have been in the works for over two years!)

## Handlers for Algebraic Effects
Algebraic effects abstractly specify operations, which are given meaning by
handlers. These provide a powerful mechanism for designing effectful code.

Read more in Hillerström & Lindley's
[Liberating Effects with Rows and Handlers](http://homepages.inf.ed.ac.uk/slindley/papers/links-effect.pdf) and in
`examples/handlers`.

## Distributed Concurrency
Whereas before, communication using session types and actor-style processes was
limited to processes on the same concurrency runtime, Dalry provides the
infrastructure to use these concurrency primitives across concurrency runtimes.
See more in `examples/distribution`.

## Javascript FFI
Dalry brings support for natively calling JavaScript functions from Links client
code. You can read more on the [wiki page](https://github.com/links-lang/links/wiki/JavaScript-FFI).

## Standard Library
Links now has support for a standard library. We are hoping to gradually move
things out of the more monolithic prelude, and support more data structures and
algorithms out of the box. For now, we have included a minimal node-indexed
binary tree library, which you can load with `open BinaryTree`.

## Support for Programmatic XML Construction
Links now supports the ability to create XML from variants, and variants from XML.
These are implemented in the `xmlToVariant` and `variantToXml` functions.

## Minor Changes

  * Links now has native readline functionality by default. To turn this off, run with the `-r` flag.
  * Many bugfixes.

# Version 0.7 (Dalry)

Version 0.7 of Links brings many new features (some of which have been in the works for over two years!)

## Handlers for Algebraic Effects
Algebraic effects abstractly specify operations, which are given meaning by
handlers. These provide a powerful mechanism for designing effectful code.

Read more in Hillerström & Lindley's
[Liberating Effects with Rows and Handlers](http://homepages.inf.ed.ac.uk/slindley/papers/links-effect.pdf) and in
`examples/handlers`.

## Distributed Concurrency
Whereas before, communication using session types and actor-style processes was
limited to processes on the same concurrency runtime, Dalry provides the
infrastructure to use these concurrency primitives across concurrency runtimes.
See more in `examples/distribution`.

## Javascript FFI
Dalry brings support for natively calling JavaScript functions from Links client
code. You can read more on the [wiki page](https://github.com/links-lang/links/wiki/JavaScript-FFI).

## Standard Library
Links now has support for a standard library. We are hoping to gradually move
things out of the more monolithic prelude, and support more data structures and
algorithms out of the box. For now, we have included a minimal node-indexed
binary tree library, which you can load with `open BinaryTree`.

## Support for Programmatic XML Construction
Links now supports the ability to create XML from variants, and variants from XML.
These are implemented in the `xmlToVariant` and `variantToXml` functions.

## Minor Changes

  * Links now has native readline functionality by default. To turn this off, run with the `-r` flag.
  * Many bugfixes.

# 0.6.1

Bugfix release:

  * install required JavaScript libraries, examples and a default configuration
    file

  * Automatically locate config file inside the current directory or inside OPAM
    installation

  * Correctly support multiple remote clients

# 0.6 (Gorgie)

Version 0.6 of Links brings many changes.

## Session Types

Session types are a type system for communication channels, allowing
conformance to communication protocols to be checked at
compile-time. Links supports session types natively; for more
information, see the examples/sessions directory.

## Server-side concurrency

Links now implements message-passing concurrency on the server-side
using OCaml's light-weight threading (Lwt) library.

## Application Server

A major addition in the Gorgie release is the ability to run Links
applications using a standalone web server, as opposed to using Links
as a CGI interpreter.  This allows Links to be set up more quickly,
and for the easier development of applications where state must
persist over multiple requests. For more information, see the
examples/webserver directory.

## Modules

Links now supports an experimental simple modules system, allowing the
development of modular code over multiple files. To enable modules,
either run Links with the -m flag, or set the "modules" setting to
true in the configuration file.

To see examples of modules in action, check examples/webserver/examples.links.

## Recursive Type Inlining

Recursive types can now be written without explicitly writing
recursive type variables. For example, whereas before a list could be
defined as:

> typename List(a) = mu X . [| Nil : (), Cons : (a, X) |]

It is now possible to write:

> typename List(a) = [| Nil : (), Cons : (a, List(a)) |]


## Real Pages

Previously Links offered two web modes: server mode and client
mode. In server mode web pages were built on the server and it was not
possible to generate any JavaScript in the web page. In client mode a
stub was generated on the server. The stub contained JavaScript which
generated the actual content of the web page dynamically using the DOM
API.

Now, web pages are always generated on the server, but they may
contain JavaScript. In particular, they may include embedded event
handlers implemented by processes which are spawned on the server,
serialised, and sent to the server along with the body of the web
page.

In order to spawn a process on the server that needs to run on the
client, use the spawnClient keyword in place of spawn. This is the
primary change that needs to be made when adapting old code to work
with the realpages feature.

## Shredding

Links now includes experimental support for query shredding. This
allows queries with nested result types to be written. A nested query
is guaranteed to translate to at most n SQL queries, where n is the
nesting depth of the source query. It currently only works for the
postgresql database back end. The shredding extension is enabled by
configuring the shredding setting to the value true.
